---
title: Books
---

# Books I have read

Books I have read and my thoughts on them.  I have read more books
than this; this list was started some time after I gained basic
literacy.  New entries added at the top.  I probably won't add books I
really didn't like.

As most nerds, I have read a lot of fantasy.  Some good, most mediocre
(but might have seemed good at the time).  Today I mostly prefer
modern hard sci-fi, although I am also trying to make my way through
the classics of literature.

In contrast to some, I don't enjoy sci-fi when it is an allegory over
current events or society, or whatnot.  I like it best when it is a
particularly elaborate what-if story.

## Moby Dick by Herman Melville

As I suppose is the case for most people, I was well aware of the
basic plot of *Moby Dick*, as well as its surface interpretations.
Yet I had never actually read it, and I was curious to see if it was
really a "dense symbolist tome" as it was called in [media I am more
familiar
with](https://theinfosphere.org/The_Day_the_Earth_Stood_Stupid).  To
my surprise, it's actually a rather pleasant and even somewhat funny
read.  The narrator (call him Ishmael) comes off as supremely
neurotic, stating on the very first page that he goes to sea every
time he feels the urge to kill himself.  Almost everyone in this tale
is highly quirky and speaks in hilariously flowery language.  The
infamous Ahab doesn't even come across as that unusual among this
crew, and doesn't interfere much with the plot until the very abrupt
end.  While I have no doubt that I missed a lot of the deeper
symbolism and such, *Moby Dick* is worth reading simply because it is
an amusing and well-told story.  The actual plot is pretty unimportant
(you know what it is already, and how it ends); but the writing is
just so elaborate that even chapters were nothing happens are
delightful to read.  And speaking of chapters, the fact that the book
is split into literally 135 chapters makes it quite easy to pick up
and put down for short reading sessions.

Oh, and the chapters that go off on tangents about the specifics of
whaling, and whale biology as it was understood in the mid 19th
century, are amusing all on their own.

## Dune by Frank Herbert

The following concerns only the original *Dune* and the three sequels
*Dune Messiah*, *Children of Dune*, and *God Emperor of Dune*.  I have
heard that the ones after this are dreadful.  I must admit I was a bit
disappointed in all of them.  While by no means bad books, I think
they are eclipsed by the later installments in the genre they helped
create; many of which I read before their progenitor.  While the books
were quite atmospheric, I felt they began to increasingly depend on
sheer weirdness, and lack of explanation of the universe.  I often had
the feeling that the ideas under discussion were simple enough, but
obscured with strange jargon.  While not my favourite way of
storytelling, it can work (see *Ancillary Justice*).  I just don't
think it did here.  (The later books are the worst at this - but
definitely read the original *Dune*.)

## Ancillary {Justice, Sword, Mercy} by Ann Leckie

While I was initially put off by *Ancillary Justice* as it relied
heavily on its setting simply being inexplicably *weird*, something
about the writing kept me reading, and the trilogy is now one of my
absolute favourites.  The books are fairly short and the plot is quite
tight.  Everything in this story just feels *polished*.  The basic
premise of the book is simply how a military dictatorship is run
through distributed natural and artificial intelligence, and what
might happen when that starts to break down, although such a
description doesn't give much justice to the richness and atmosphere
of the books.
